So, so far all the data that we've used
inside these components has been static,
it hasn't changed.
But a lot of the time when
you're building web apps,
the data in your components will change.
And Svelte has a powerful system of
reactivity to make that possible.
So first, we're gonna add
an event handler to this button.
And we'll go into more detail about event
handlers, what they are and how they work,
in a later section of this tutorial.
But for now, Just roll with it,
on:click= ,
give it a reference to this function
which is defined inside our script block.
And then we just need to
implement handleClick, and
it's very simple, count += 1.
And now when we click this button,
The count clicks up.
The way that this works is that
Svelte instruments the assignment.
When it sees this count += 1,
it replaces that in the generated code,
which we'll look at in more detail later.
The instruments that we just called
to a function called invalidate,
which tells the component that
a specific value has changed.
The component in turn tells the Svelte
scheduler that the component needs to be
re-landed.
And that is how reactivity
works on a per-value level.
Now, very often,
you'll have some state that is derived
from other parts of your state.
So we got our button here
that increments the counter.
Let's say we wanna add a double value,
which is count * 2.
We could do this double = count * 2:, and
then add the sign text beneath it,
(count) doubled is (doubled).
Can't type today.
But it's not updating, and
the reason for that is that the contents
of thid script block execute once when
a component is created per component.
And so this doubled = count * 2,
that's just gonna run at the start
of the component's lifecycle, and
then it's never gonna be rerun.
We want that statement to rerun every
time the value of count changes, and
we can do that with a convenient
little piece of syntax.
Change that let to $:.
Now when you click it,
It doubles as you'd expect.
Now this might look a little bit strange,
because this isn't JavaScript syntax,
that you're probably familiar with.
It is in fact valid JavaScript.
This right here is called a label.
And it's used when you're building a for
loop or a while loop.
You'd have a label, and
then later you can do break label name.
And that allows you to control
the flow of your application
in a way that you generally don't need.
Outside the context of the loop,
it has no value whatsoever.
So when we were building Svelte,
we thought, let's just steal that.
The reason that we have to make
everything valid JavaScript is because,
as I'll explain later,
we're using off the shelf JavaScript
parses to parse everything inside here.
So everything has to be
syntactically valid.
But it does not mean that
this needs to behave the way that it would
ordinarily behave inside JavaScript.
We get to make the rules.
So this here is what we call
a reactive declaration.
And we can have as many
of them as we like.
So I can have one that
depends on the reactive
value of doubled quadrupled = doubled * 2.
Add another one of these.
And that also works as you would expect.
And you'll notice,
that these aren't defined in the order
that they would ordinarily need to run.
Instead, they're executed in
what's called topological order.
Which means that Svelte understands the
quadruple depends on the value of doubled.
And therefore, it needs to calculate
doubled before it calculates quadrupled.
So this might look a little bit weird and
a little bit alien, but
I promise you that once you get used
to it, it becomes second nature.
And it's a very convenient feature And
it's not just declarations
that we can run reactively.
We can also run any arbitrary
statement in the same way.
So for example, we can do console.log
:.
Then you'll see here that it gets
logged every time that value changes.
So that's really useful for debugging.
And you can group statements together
by putting them in a block, like so.
And it's not even gonna let me type
that because it's gonna reevaluate on
every chain.
So I'm just gonna paste
the whole thing in.
If we change that, we get another alert,
and if we change that, another alert,
and so on.
Please don't do that to your users.
And you can even put the $ in
front of things like if blocks.
I'm just gonna copy and
paste that whole lot into here.
And now when I click it,
if we get too high,
it'll prevent you from going any further.
And it's not just symbol permitted,
we can update in this fashion.
We can also use the reactivity
to update arrays and objects,
but there is a caveat which
we're gonna explore here.
So we have this function, Add number,
which is gonna push to our numbers array.
When I click this button,
it's not doing anything, and
that's because numbers.push
is not reactive.
Svelte doesn't look at that and
say, we're mutating this array,
therefore we need to recalculate
anything that involves numbers.
It needs to see an assignment.
That's how the system works.
So we can do underneath that numbers =
numbers, that's one way of doing it.
But it's not very idiomatic,
it looks a little bit weird.
It's useful in a pinch, but
it's actually better if rather than
mutating that numbers array and
then reassigning it to itself,
if we create a new copy of our array,
we can do that, like so.
Print new array, spread the existing value
into it, and then add the new value.
And now, it updates exactly the same way.
And you can use similar
patterns to replace shift and
shift and
splice the other array mutation methods.